ladies and general welcome back to the
workshop it is fantastic to have you
here as ever because on today's episode
we're going to be taking a $7 Harbor
Freight hammer and making it perform
like a beautiful forged 200 dollar
hammer before jump in looks like today's
sponsor which is rain shadow legends for
making all of this possible
brave is dark fantasy RPG games that
reminds me a lot of those old-school
role player games back in the day by
Final Fantasy which is fantastic you've
been hearing about rain shadow legends
all over the Internet I'm sure but have
you actually played it because now is
the time to try here we go
look at these beasts okay it's a
dismantle there we go thrill of the hunt
are we he's down Oh get him no no
they're attacking me No yeah there we go
he's down I think that guy's pretty
strong he's not going to go down there
we go and we're through you can get
whatever you want from the game whether
it is that you want to socialize and
fight alongside teammates or whether you
want to fight PvP against other players
you can enjoy collecting champions and
just have an all-around great time and
right now is the time to try it because
if you have Amazon Prime especially
before March 22nd when you log in you're
gonna be giving three void shards and
for superior void potions to Amazon
Prime members be sure to go and clean
your loot now but regardless you can get
great bonuses by hitting my link in the
description down below you're gonna be
getting 100,000 free silver an energy
refill 50 gems and an epic champion look
at this guy he's awesome it's the
executioner over the next 30 days you
can be getting extra rewards in your
inbox so be sure to stay tuned
look at this champion he's got its fight
under just like this sword we're working
on now we do our having a little pause
this week but this is epic this is super
cool champion of crusader check it out
now and enjoy it for free on iOS or
Android as well as on PC and it'll work
seamlessly between PC and Mobile the
links are in the description we're very
grateful for raid sponsoring this let's
jump in and turn a $7 hammer into
underperformance like a two hundred
dollar one okie dokie so here's what we
have hammer wise from Harbor Freight and
costing a whopping $7 right here is a
Pittsburgh three pound sledge hammer
with a 16 inch hardwood handle we also
have a Pittsburgh three pound cross peen
hammer next to some forged blacksmithing
hammers
let's have a closer look
[Music]
all righty let me tell you some of the
problems I see with the $7.00 hammer
start off with the handle was loose off
the shelf as it came from the store I
had a loose handle and when you're
forging you don't want the head of the
hammer to be rattling around and it can
also end up being a little bit of a
safety hazard because if the head flies
off it could hit you or somebody or put
a hole in the wall or a window no fun
the wobbly handle here is caused because
the fit between the handle and the eye
the hole of the hammer is really
imprecise so much so that they've
actually jammed some epoxy it looks like
in there but it wasn't an epoxy strong
enough to actually hold it to the head
which is a shame so it wobbles around no
good the biggest gripe however is how
the faces come the faces come very flat
with just one chamfer around it meaning
butt though is chamfered here it has a
very sharp transition between the flat
and that chamfer so if you go to forge
with it it'll be putting a few extra
hammer marks in your work there's gonna
be a lot more difficult to get out it
also has two identical faces obviously
that's normal for this style of hammer
but I am quite partial to the rounding
hammer with one rounding face and one
flat face with much wider radii on the
edges so that you are able to have a
much better degree of control over the
steel and mitigate the risk of nuisance
hammer locks but with all that said a
hammer is just a lump of metal on a
stick and even with the seven dollar
hammer from Harbor Freight you can still
make stuff because it's a whole lot more
about knowing how to make it than it is
but
fools used so let's make something
[Music]
[Applause]
in a quick and dirty two heats we're
still able to make something the hammer
moves steel it forges the loose head
threw me off a little bit but I was able
to forge a decent taper do a quick
isolation or without a problem the only
downside was is that I tried to forge
out the leaf itself those edges of the
hammer really came to bite me and that's
those rather unsightly marks that you're
seeing so we're gonna tackle some of
these issues first things first we're
gonna fix that handle fit see if we need
to make a new handle see if we can fix
what we've already got and then we're
gonna tackle the faces first things
first I'm gonna cut off this little rag
right here where the sharp head is
peeling up the wood the gap in the
handle is so bad I can fit this with
knife blade all the way down it I don't
know if we're gonna be able to fix it
that's what you get for $7.00 to see if
we can fix it I'm gonna drive the handle
further into the head and that is the
downside to this shape of a hammer
handle as you drive it down that swell
on the handle all of a sudden becomes so
thick that instead of compressing into
the head it just broke off on the sharp
edges of the hammer home the good news
is the handle is now tight we push it
out about 3/8 to 1/4 of an inch you see
how much gap there is in there that's
really not good that's such a shame but
we now need to do is find a way of
wedging out the material enough that it
fills the top of the eye a little bit of
a dilemma here they fitted it with both
a wood wedge and my least favorite of
wedges the round wedge what I like to do
and how is that I make is fit them only
with a wood wedge and make sure it's a
really good fit that means that God
forbid the handle does come loose in
time it's a natural material and changes
in humidity can make it happen and not
having a steel wedge in means that when
it does come loose you can drive the
handle down and then install a steel
wedge in that new climate so gives you
that little extra
opportunity to do it well now there's a
steel wedge and all we can really do to
try this let's try driving the steel
wedge in further and I don't know if
it's gonna work because a round wedge
doesn't really do a perfect job of
spreading out the material the same way
that first wood wedge does this is why I
don't like these wedges they're
impossible to drive any deeper than the
wood this is not gonna work oh boy oh
boy
this was a useless way I will no longer
turn up my nose of this hammer but I
will strive to make it better the reason
I'm doing this is I want to make this
accessible to you guys I don't use all
the fancy tools to get it done I wanted
to try and do it a little more simply
this time the best thing to do now would
be to put an entire new handle in let's
see if we can do it without doing that
step I want to show this in the easiest
way possible okay so as you saw I took
that ridiculous round steel wedge out of
there after driving the handle up
through I then pulled the wood wedge out
and I feel like if we had a wider wood
wedge we could indeed open up the wood
enough that we got a good fit maybe
without even needing a steel wedge this
is gonna involve a little bit of
woodworking and now my dear viewers and
wonderful commenters over the last many
years I have received a whole lot of
flack for not actually having
woodworking equipment and at last the
peer pressure has pushed me to the
breaking limit and I wanna show you some
new toys that I got look at this one
contractor variety table saw so that we
can actually rip wood without needing to
use that ridiculous battery-powered saw
as well as a thickness planer hugely
exciting I've wasted so much time and I
made myself have to do someone's rework
and over processing by not having
woodworking equipment now we will solve
that we're still missing a woodworking
bandsaw so I need to grab one of those
at some point but for this project we
don't actually need to use any of that
equipment the
Silvanus all that we have is all we need
because I already have a piece of
hickory I'm gonna make a wedge from this
[Music]
[Applause]
here's what the wedge looks like a few
things it is not wider than the eye
itself otherwise that won't work it has
a slight taper to it in this dimension
because eyes of hammers have a taper to
them around the end slightly to match up
with the rounding of the eye
I also gave the end a very thin chisel
grind I also don't want to forget you
see how we have a chamfer on the top of
the wedge that's gonna save it from
splitting we're gonna wood glue the
wedge in do notice that the bottom of
the handle is supported we're gonna use
the wood wedge to split the handle apart
as it drives down
starting to get pretty firm we've
actually cracked that wood wedge already
not the end of the world flip it over
and then I'll ham up from the bottom of
the handle since that wedge is starting
to really free apart I know I'm not
gonna achieve anything by hammering it
further
it's definitely tightened up the fit of
the eye a good deal we're gonna grind
off the top
[Music]
something really weird with the way this
happens made this is lip here see where
that knife is hitting so it looks like
there's a whole lot more space than
there actually is because in this weird
lip well filled up but there is that
little lip in there at the top of the
eye which is throwing me off so I'm
gonna call the handle fit up ready if it
does come loose I'll throw a steel wedge
in next thing we want to deal with the
actual handle itself because it's nasty
it's got a varnish coating on it which
is gonna give you blisters and it's also
this oval profile I prefer handles that
have a flat down the length of them I
also want a better chamfer on the end
here that's gonna help reducing
splitting the handle if you do ever have
to read rive it you can tackle this by
locking the handle not the head in a
vise and rasping on it to get rid of the
varnish coating and cranking your flash
you could also use one of these cheap
belt Sanders or even use an angle
grinder for speed I'll just use the belt
grinder
[Music]
[Applause]
we lack in the handle with a torch
because I like the look of it also means
it can look a little cleaner you don't
notice the dirt as much taking some pine
tar this is made as a byproduct of
making charcoal from Pines but a
beautiful smell to it and it's gonna
help us protect the wood linseed oil
would also work an absolute treat for
this you really don't have to get too
fancy the handle now feels really good
it's a little slimmer up here than I'd
like but I'm happy with that
the idea is minimal effort minimal money
making the hammer work like a more
expensive one next step in the direction
of that goal is for us to tackle the
faces I'm gonna be doing it with an
angle grinder because you can pick up an
angle grinder for like 30 bucks and just
like anything it's really a whole lot
less about the tool than it is knowing
what you're trying to achieve so you can
see the grinds here flat across the top
and then there's just one chamfer on the
edges here we actually have a square
with the corners broken off and I like
this I like having this long flat and it
has a much more gently sloping radius
the first thing that I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna flatten off the face and then I'm
gonna take the angle grinder and I'm
gonna start at a very shallow angle and
I'm gonna go back and forth rounding my
way around it to create a similar radius
on the edges to this I'm gonna be using
a 60 grit flap disc you can pick these
up anywhere
I'm fine licensing the pressure you can
achieve a better surface finish but
there are also finishing discs that you
can use to get an even higher polish
them either more interested in the
geometry
[Music]
[Applause]
we got it done with the angle grinder
it's not as clean as it would be with a
belt grinder but it gets the job done
next step is the rounding face need to
turn this a little more into that this
isn't a ball Roy brown Brazil describes
it is as a squashed ball you have a very
large radius at the top of the ball and
then a progressively smaller and smaller
radius as you come around the sides of
the faces this means you have
progressively more and more and more psi
that you can apply with the hammer to
control how you move it and so the trick
as I round this is to make sure that the
top is a much flatter radius than the
edges but it still has to be a very
gentle transition between side of the
hair and the faces itself
[Music]
[Applause]
it's definitely not as fancy as one of
these forged hammers it definitely
doesn't have the fit and finish has
longer proportions that I'd like it's a
rough old job but it is gonna fall and
we're gonna prove it
[Music]
it is so much nicer to Forge with those
edges give you so much more control some
much more consistent hammer below
because you know what those edges are
gonna do they're softer there's less
unsightly hammer marks this is a hammer
you could Forge anything with the
difference in this hammer before and
after is worlds apart so much more
pleasant to use so much more control you
can get a much more aesthetically
pleasing and have a mark in it it's
definitely not the best leave I've ever
made but it's a lot better than the
first one because the hammer wasn't
wobbling on the handle it felts so much
more comfortable to use and this I hope
helps show it's not all about the type
of tools that you have it's also about
how you can modify those tools to work
for you fundamentally it's just about
getting stuck in and keeping it a go
because getting the experience and the
practice gonna be so much more than
having the absolute best tools now after
how simple this was this only took a few
hours to get this sorted why would you
get one of these well out of the box it
comes ready to go it's beautiful
beautiful things are nice to have that's
why I like having Abbott's like this
supposed to like this you don't need
this to get the job done before the
video ends I wanna let you know we're
gonna be giving away a square circle
rounding hammer and you can have a
chance of winning it simply by dropping
a comment down below with the
blacksmithing or Bladesman in question
that you want answered we might be able
to help out with will be picking a
winner at random thank you guys so much
drop that comment down below see you
soon bye